# ARD-005: DynamoDB Integration to Store Animal Notes

## Context

OAS requires persistent storage for observer notes (medical observations) and behavior notes logged by shelter staff and veterinarians. Previously these were stored in-memory in a singular Excel Sheet that resulted in staff workers to input duplicate observations and redundant data; taking away at time and efficiency for robust animal car from the veterinians. A persistent database solution was needed to ensure staff can input detailed observation and behavorial data without the prevalence of duplicate entries and that can easily be queried and checked by veterinians.

## Decision

We chose DynamoDB from AWS as the database to store Observer and Behavior notes. The notes are stored in Key Value pairs into two tables: 
`ObservationNotes` and `BehaviorNotes`.

Each table stored information in the following key pairs: 

-   `petId` - Partition Key (PK) pulled from the RescueGroupsAPI
- `timestamp` - Sort Key (SK) enabling chronological lookup of animal notes.
- A unique  `id` - a unique ID for a particular note that allows easy deletion and update especially to resolve  `status` in  `ObserverNotes`

## Architecture:

- Inputs and Outputs to the database are primarily handled by `ObserverNoteDBRepository` and the `BehaviorNoteDBRepository` which isolates the DynamoDB logic from the controllers layers.

- input formatting is handled by the `controllers` before being passed on to the `repositories` for storage.

## Consequences

### Pros

- DynamoDB is schemaless so it allows dynamic note attributes without much change
- The billing when hosted on AWS will by `PAY_PER_REQUEST` so it's scaleable in terms of finances
- The layered architecture with the `controllers` and `repositories` allows the database to be easily replaced if needed

### Cons

- Pagination requires everything to be scanned sequentially while querying.
- Deleting by  `id` requires a two step process to delete.
